feat(mig-guide-oss): added migration guide for oss users (#1597)
SigNoz/signoz.io: data/guides/metrics-migration-oss-guide.mdx

> # Metrics Migration Guide for OSS Users

Reviewer: Please add metadata

```
---
date: 2025-06-24
title: Metrics Migration Guide (OSS)
id: metrics-migration-oss
description: "Move from underscore to dot-metrics exporter in self-hosted SigNoz"
---

## Overview

> We are in the process of metrics migration, the following doc will help you migrate to a new metrics exporter. This guide will help you migrate your existing alerts and dashboards to the new system.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
SigNoz is migrating from the legacy underscore exporter to the new dot-metrics exporter. This guide will help you migrate your existing alerts and dashboards to the new system.
```

## Background

> As previously communicated, we have transitioning from running both the old and new exporters simultaneously to running only the new exporter.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As previously communicated, SigNoz is moving from running both the old and new exporters simultaneously to running only the new exporter.
```

> Further Details about this migration can be seen [here](https://signoz.io/guides/metrics-migration/)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Further Details about this migration are available [here](https://signoz.io/guides/metrics-migration/).
```

## Migration Script

We provide a comprehensive migration script that will help you:
- Migrate all existing alerts and dashboards
- Backfill historical data for high retention users
- Ensure seamless transition to the new metrics system

> Github - [Migration Script](https://github.com/SigNoz/signoz-db-migrations/tree/main/migration-0.70)

Reviewer: <img width="1425" alt="Screenshot 2025-06-25 at 2 17 48 PM" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/91420756-11aa-4c43-884b-9909f8345d3e" />
This repository seems to be archived. Why is it so ?

Reviewer: Also, there is no ReadMe available

## Migration Steps

### Pre-Requisite

1.) Take the backup of your SQLite DB.
2.) Take the count of total metrics, samples, and fingerprints, for checking the counts post migration.
3.) The migration process uses various environment variables to configure database connections, performance settings, and migration behavior. Understanding these variables is crucial for successful migration.

> ClickHouse Connection Variables

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**ClickHouse Connection Variables**
```

| Variable | Description | Default | Required |
|----------|-------------|---------|----------|

> | `CH_ADDR` | ClickHouse server address and port | `localhostl:9001` | Yes |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `CH_ADDR` | ClickHouse server address and port | `localhost:9001` | Yes |
```

| `CH_DATABASE` | ClickHouse database name for metrics | `default` | Yes |
| `CH_USER` | ClickHouse username for authentication | `default` | Yes |
| `CH_PASS` | ClickHouse password for authentication | `""` (empty) | Yes |

> ClickHouse Performance & Connection Pool Variables

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**ClickHouse Performance & Connection Pool Variables**
```

| Variable | Description | What we used / Default |
|----------|-------------|---------|---------|
| `CH_MAX_OPEN_CONNS` | Maximum number of open database connections | `10` (metadata), `32` (data), `5` (default) |
| `CH_MAX_IDLE_CONNS` | Maximum number of idle connections in pool | `8`, `2` (default) |
| `CH_CONN_MAX_LIFETIME` | Maximum lifetime of a connection | `30m`, `10m` (default) |
| `CH_DIAL_TIMEOUT` | Connection timeout duration | `60s`, `5s` (default) |
| `CH_MAX_MEMORY_USAGE` | Maximum memory usage per query (bytes) | `8388608000` (8GB), `1048576000` (default 1GB) |
| `CH_MAX_BYTES_BEFORE_EXTERNAL_GROUP_BY` | Memory threshold for external GROUP BY operations | `524288000` (500MB),  `104857600` (default 100MB)|
| `CH_MAX_BYTES_BEFORE_EXTERNAL_SORT` | Memory threshold for external sorting | `524288000` (500MB), `104857600` (default 100MB) |
| `CH_MAX_EXECUTION_TIME` | Maximum query execution time (seconds) | `300`, `90` (default) |
| `CH_MAX_THREADS` | Maximum threads for query processing | `50`, `10`(default) |

> Migration-Specific Variables

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Migration-Specific Variables**
```

| Variable | Description | Default | Usage |
|----------|-------------|---------|-------|
| `MIGRATE_WORKERS` | Number of parallel migration workers | `12` | Data migration performance |
| `MIGRATE_MAX_OPEN_CONNS` | Maximum connections for migration process | `32` | Migration-specific connection limit |

> Metrics & Attributes Mapping Variables

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Metrics & Attributes Mapping Variables**
```

These variables handle mappings for metrics and attributes that may have changed names during the migration, and their dot correspondent metrics and attribute name is not present in the DB.

| Variable | Description | Example Value |
|----------|-------------|---------------|
| `NOT_FOUND_METRICS_MAP` | Maps old metric names to new ones, it would be passed as string in this manner 'key1=value1,key2=value2' | `rpc_server_responses_per_rpc_bucket=rpc.server.responses_per_rpc.bucket` |

> | `NOT_FOUND_ATTR_MAP` | Maps old attribute names to new ones, it would be passed as string in this manner 'key1=value1,key2=value2' | `http_scheme=http.scheme,net_peer_name=net.peer.name` |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `NOT_FOUND_ATTR_MAP` | Maps old attribute names to new ones, it would be passed as string in this manner 'key1=value1,key2=value2' | `http_scheme=http.scheme,net_peer_name=net.peer.name` |
```

Check description - seems to be same as above variable which doesn't make sense.

> | `NOT_FOUND_ATTR_MAP` | skip invalid metrics, it would be passed as string in this manner 'metricName1=true,metricName2=true' | `http_scheme=http.scheme,net_peer_name=net.peer.name` |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `NOT_FOUND_ATTR_MAP` | skip invalid metrics, it would be passed as string in this manner 'metricName1=true,metricName2=true' | `http_scheme=http.scheme,net_peer_name=net.peer.name` |
```

Check the variable name. Seems to be incorrect.

> ### 1. Docker Users

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Docker Users
```

#### Step 3: Need to enable new metrics

> You also need to pass environment variable ```DOT_METRICS_ENABLED``` to ```true```, to allow the platform to use dot metrics.

Reviewer: Step 1 and 2 missing here.

          value: "32"
        - name: CH_MAX_MEMORY_USAGE
          value: "8388608000"
        - name: CH_MAX_BYTES_BEFORE_EXTERNAL_GROUP_BY
          value: "524288000"
        - name: CH_MAX_BYTES_BEFORE_EXTERNAL_SORT
          value: "524288000"
        - name: CH_DIAL_TIMEOUT
          value: "60s"
        - name: CH_CONN_MAX_LIFETIME
          value: "30m"
        - name: CH_MAX_IDLE_CONNS
          value: "8"
        - name: CH_MAX_EXECUTION_TIME
          value: "300"
        - name: CH_MAX_THREADS
          value: "50"
        - name: MIGRATE_WORKERS
          value: "12"
        - name: MIGRATE_MAX_OPEN_CONNS
          value: "32"
        - name: NOT_FOUND_METRICS_MAP
          value: "rpc_server_responses_per_rpc_bucket=rpc.server.responses_per_rpc.bucket"
        - name: NOT_FOUND_ATTR_MAP
          value: "http_scheme=http.scheme,net_peer_name=net.peer.name,net_peer_port=net.peer.port,net_protocol_name=net.protocol.name,net_protocol_version=net.protocol.version,rpc_grpc_status_code=rpc.grpc.status_code,rpc_method=rpc.method,rpc_service=rpc.service,rpc_system=rpc.system"
        resources:
          requests:
            memory: 116000Mi

>             cpu: 29500m

Reviewer: 113 GiB/29 cores? Is this the requirement ?

# 3) View logs from the *init container* named `migration`
kubectl logs <pod-name> -c migration -n <your-namespace>

#    …or follow them in real time
kubectl logs -f <pod-name> -c migration -n <your-namespace>

#    If the init container has already finished, add --previous
kubectl logs <pod-name> -c migration --previous -n <your-namespace>
```
#### Step 3: Need to enable new metrics

You also need to pass environment variable ```DOT_METRICS_ENABLED``` to ```true``` while running the SigNoz container, to allow the platform to use dot metrics.

## Important Notes

### High Retention Users

If you have metrics retention configured for a longer duration and weren't able to run both exporters for the same period, you first need to migrate and backfill the previous data only then you can go ahead with alerts and dashboards migration. This ensures continuity in your monitoring and alerting.

### Verification Steps

After running the migration:

1. **Check your dashboards** - Verify that all widgets are displaying data correctly
2. **Validate alerts** - Ensure all alert rules are functioning as expected
3. **Monitor for gaps** - Look for any data gaps in your metrics timeline

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Note**: This migration is a one-time process. Once completed successfully, your system will be fully transitioned to the new metrics exporter.
```

## Troubleshooting

### Common Issues

- **Connection errors**: Verify your ClickHouse connection parameters
- **Permission issues**: Ensure the Docker container has access to your `signoz.db` file
- **Data inconsistencies**: Run the migration script again if you notice missing data

### Getting Help

If you encounter issues during migration:

- Check the [SigNoz Documentation](https://signoz.io/docs/)
- Visit our [GitHub Issues](https://github.com/SigNoz/signoz/issues)
- Join our [Community Slack](https://signoz.io/slack) for real-time support

## Next Steps

Once migration is complete:

1. Monitor your system for a few days to ensure stability
2. Update any external integrations that might reference the old metrics format
3. Consider optimizing your retention policies based on the new exporter's capabilities

---

> **Note**: This migration is a one-time process. Once completed successfully, your system will be fully transitioned to the new metrics exporter.

Reviewer: ```suggestion

```
